Deploying a website means transferring your code from your local computer to a public web server so that anyone on the internet can access it via a URL. It is the final bridge between a project you are building privately and a live digital product.
The Process: It involves compiling code, running automated tests, and pushing the files to a host like Render.
EG. Render 
    Digital Ocean
    Deploy


Production is the actual environment where real users interact with your application
The Environment: This is the live, final version of your application (e.g., the active Discord bot or live website).

What Render Does?
Hosts backend code: Runs Node.js, Python, and other programming languages.
Connects to GitHub: Deploys your code automatically when you push updates.
Runs bots 24/7: Keeps your programs active in the cloud


Discord is a free voice, video, and text communication platform used by tens of millions of people to talk and hang out in private or public communities. 
Discord is the actual chat app where users build servers, join voice channels, and send messages.


//to store all sensitive / configuration values shouldn't be hard-coded. Thus store them in .env file and access it inside node.js using process.env.VariableName.

dot env

1. npm install dotenv

2.Create file named .env

3.In index.js write: require ('dotenv').config()

4. app.listen(process.env.PORT, () => {
    console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`);
   });

app.listen(...): This is an Express method that tells your server to start up and wait for network traffic at a specific address (port).

process.env.PORT: This reads the port number from your computer's environment variables.Production hosting platforms (like Render, Heroku, or AWS) use this variable to dynamically assign an open port to your app.

() => { ... }This is a callback function.It runs automatically exactly once, right after the server successfully starts up.

console.log(...)This prints a confirmation message to your terminal so you know the server is running.


5. Make a .gitignore file so as to not push that file on gitHub.
.gitignore: tells git which files/folders it shouldnt track

6. git init
   git add .
   git commit -m "first commit"
   git branch -M main
   git remote add origin https://github.com/salomecarval6-netizen/BackEnd.git
   git push -u origin main

Thus code now on Git

7. Use any app to deploy